.TH SALT 1 "2026-04-29" "salt" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
salt \- encrypt plaintext with libsodium sealed boxes for GitHub secrets
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B salt
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ PLAINTEXT ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B salt
encrypts plaintext with libsodium sealed boxes and writes encrypted output to stdout.

The public key is provided with
.BR --key / -k
and may be a base64 key, a JSON object containing key metadata, or
.B -
to read key input from stdin.

The plaintext may be provided as a positional argument or via stdin.

Output mode defaults to base64 text and can be switched to JSON for REST payload workflows.

Errors are written to stderr.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -k " VALUE", " --key " VALUE
Required key input. VALUE may be:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
base64 public key string
.IP \[bu] 2
JSON object string with
.B key
and optional
.B key_id
.IP \[bu] 2
.B -
to read key input from stdin
.RE

JSON key parsing is strict: only
.B key
and optional
.B key_id
fields are accepted.
.TP
.BI -i " ID", " --key-id " ID
Optional key ID override. Required for
.B --output json
when the key source does not provide
.BR key_id .
.TP
.BI -o " MODE", " --output " MODE
Output format:
.B text
or
.BR json .
Default is
.BR text .
.TP
.BI -f " MODE", " --key-format " MODE
Key parser mode:
.B auto
,
.B base64
,
or
.BR json .
Default is
.BR auto .
.TP
.BR -h , " --help"
Show usage information and exit successfully.
.TP
.BR -V , " --version"
Show version information and exit successfully.
.SH INPUT RULES
.TP
.I PLAINTEXT
If omitted or set to
.B -
, plaintext is read from stdin.
.TP
.B --key -
Reads key input from stdin.
.PP
For deterministic parsing,
.B salt
rejects reading both key and plaintext from stdin in the same invocation.
.PP
Plaintext input must be between 1 byte and 48 KiB, matching the GitHub
Actions per-secret value limit. The underlying
.BR salt_seal_base64 (3)
library accepts up to 1 MiB.
Key input read from stdin is limited to 16 KiB.
.PP
Sensitive plaintext should be passed via stdin; positional arguments are
visible in process listings
.RB ( ps (1),
.IR /proc/<pid>/cmdline ).
As defense-in-depth the production binary copies positional plaintext into
mlock'd memory and zeroes the original
.I argv
slot in place after the copy, but stdin remains the recommended input path.
.PP
The production
.B salt
binary disables core dumps via
.BR setrlimit (2)
.RB ( RLIMIT_CORE
= 0) and
.BR prctl (2)
.RB ( PR_SET_DUMPABLE
= 0 on Linux), and locks transient secret buffers in resident memory with
.BR sodium_mlock (3)
so they cannot be paged to swap or extracted from a core file. Locking
failures (typically a low
.BR RLIMIT_MEMLOCK
inside containers) are non-fatal and fall back to plain
.BR sodium_memzero (3)
on release.
.PP
To avoid mlock warnings or increase security in restricted environments, raise
the locked-memory limit with
.B ulimit -l unlimited
(requires privilege) or configure your container runtime to allow higher
.BR RLIMIT_MEMLOCK
values.
.PP
The tool validates inputs, decodes the key, encrypts using
.BR crypto_box_seal (3),
and base64-encodes ciphertext for output.

.SH OUTPUT MODES
.TP
.B text
Print ciphertext as base64 on a single line.
.TP
.B json
Print JSON object with:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
.B encrypted_value
(base64-encoded ciphertext)
.IP \[bu] 2
.B key_id
.RE

In JSON mode,
.B key_id
must be available from key JSON input or
.BR --key-id .

Use
.B text
mode for shell pipelines when another tool manages the
.BR key_id .
Use
.B json
mode when constructing GitHub Actions Secrets API payloads or other REST
requests that require both
.B encrypted_value
and
.BR key_id
in a single JSON object.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Input or usage error.
.TP
.B 2
Cryptographic error.
.TP
.B 3
Internal error.
.TP
.B 4
Runtime I/O or output-stream failure.
.TP
.B 5
Signal-driven interruption.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
# Base64 key, positional plaintext, output ciphertext as base64 text
salt -k "2Sg8iYjAxxmI2LvUXpJjkYrMxURPc8r+dB7TJyvv1234" "hello"

# JSON key object and JSON output with encrypted_value and key_id
salt --output json --key '{"key_id":"012345678912345678","key":"2Sg8iYjAxxmI2LvUXpJjkYrMxURPc8r+dB7TJyvv1234"}' "Hello World!"

# Key from stdin
echo '{"key_id":"012345678912345678","key":"2Sg8iYjAxxmI2LvUXpJjkYrMxURPc8r+dB7TJyvv1234"}' | salt --output json --key - "Hello World!"

# Plaintext from stdin
echo 'Hello World!' | salt --output json --key '{"key_id":"012345678912345678","key":"2Sg8iYjAxxmI2LvUXpJjkYrMxURPc8r+dB7TJyvv1234"}' -

# Safer bearer-header helper for GitHub API calls
readonly GITHUB_API_VERSION="2022-11-28"
auth_header_fd() { printf 'Authorization: Bearer %s\n' "${GITHUB_TOKEN}"; }

# GitHub repository secret workflow (key fetch -> encrypt -> PUT)
KEY_RESPONSE="$(curl -sS -L -w '\n%{http_code}' \
-H "Accept: application/vnd.github+json" \
-H @<(auth_header_fd) \
-H "X-GitHub-Api-Version: ${GITHUB_API_VERSION}" \
"https://api.github.com/repos/${OWNER}/${REPO}/actions/secrets/public-key")" && \
KEY_STATUS="${KEY_RESPONSE##*$'\n'}" && \
KEY_JSON="${KEY_RESPONSE%$'\n'*}" && \
[ "${KEY_STATUS}" = "200" ] && \
KEY_ID="$(printf '%s' "${KEY_JSON}" | jq -r '.key_id')" && \
PUB_KEY="$(printf '%s' "${KEY_JSON}" | jq -r '.key')" && \
SALT_JSON="$(salt --output json --key "${PUB_KEY}" --key-id "${KEY_ID}" - <"${SECRET_VALUE_FILE}")" && \
printf '%s' "${SALT_JSON}" | jq -c '{encrypted_value:.encrypted_value,key_id:.key_id}' | \
curl -sS -L -o /dev/null -w '%{http_code}' -X PUT \
-H "Accept: application/vnd.github+json" \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H @<(auth_header_fd) \
-H "X-GitHub-Api-Version: ${GITHUB_API_VERSION}" \
"https://api.github.com/repos/${OWNER}/${REPO}/actions/secrets/${SECRET_NAME}" \
--data-binary @-
.fi
.SH GITHUB REST API NOTES
Use GitHub REST API version
.BR 2022-11-28
with the Actions Secrets endpoints.
.PP
Required token permissions depend on the secret scope:
.TP
.B Repository secrets
Fine-grained token: repository
.B Secrets: write
permission. Classic token: usually
.B repo
for private repositories or
.B public_repo
for public repositories.
.TP
.B Environment secrets
Fine-grained token: repository
.B Environments: write
permission. Classic token:
.BR repo .
.TP
.B Organization secrets
Fine-grained token: organization
.B Secrets: write
permission. Classic token:
.BR admin:org .
.PP
GitHub Actions secret values are capped at 48 KiB (49152 bytes). Enforce this
before encryption so oversized plaintext fails locally rather than producing a
payload that the GitHub API rejects.
.PP
When assembling REST requests, pipe
.B salt --output json
to
.B jq
and then to
.B curl --data-binary @-
so
.BR encrypted_value ,
.BR key_id ,
and the final JSON body are not exposed through command-line arguments.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR crypto_box_seal (3),
.BR sodium_mlock (3),
.BR sodium_memzero (3),
.BR setrlimit (2),
.BR prctl (2),
.BR ps (1),
.BR curl (1),
.BR jq (1)
.PP
libsodium sealed boxes documentation:
.I https://doc.libsodium.org/public-key_cryptography/sealed_boxes
.PP
GitHub Actions Secrets API:
.I https://docs.github.com/en/rest/actions/secrets
.PP
Project repository:
.I https://github.com/CTFfactory/salt
.PP
Project documentation:
.IR README.md ,
.IR SECURITY.md ,
.IR CONTRIBUTING.md ,
.IR TESTING.md
